#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass thuthesis
\begin_preamble
\input{preamble}
\usepackage{textcomp}
\end_preamble
\options master,xetex
\use_default_options true
\master main.lyx
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package none
\inputencoding utf8-plain
\fontencoding default
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format pdf4
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
thetitle
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Title
基于相机阵列的高精度
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

人脸三维重建
\end_layout

\begin_layout Degree
工学硕士
\end_layout

\begin_layout Department
自动化系
\end_layout

\begin_layout Major
控制科学与工程
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
theauthor
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Supervisor
刘烨斌
\begin_inset space \hspace{}
\length 1.3em
\end_inset

副研究员
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
二〇一六年五月
\end_layout

\begin_layout Title(en)
Research on High Quality 3D Reconstruction of Human Face based on Camera
 Array
\end_layout

\begin_layout Degree(en)
Master of Science
\end_layout

\begin_layout Major(en)
Control Science and Engineering
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author(en)
Liang Ding
\end_layout

\begin_layout Supervisor(en)
Associate Professor Liu Yebin
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date(en)
May, 2016
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
在计算机视觉领域，与人脸相关的方向包括人脸检测、识别、关键点检测等，其最终目标都是为了通过人脸识别人物身份。现有的方法和数据库大多局限于二维平面照片，仅通过照片
难以全面地反映一个人的面部特征，因此人脸识别等应用都受到了局限。利用人脸三维模型有望提供更多面部信息，从而突破当前瓶颈。然而现有的人脸三维模型数据库数量有限，表
情较少，部分缺少耳朵、下巴等关键部位，因此需要制作一套较丰富完整的人脸三维模型数据库。
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
本文旨在实现一套人脸三维模型采集和重建系统，同时可以提供在多种光照条件下的不同人物、多表情、多视角的二维照片。本文主要包含三个部分：
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
首先，搭建三套多相机阵列系统。第一套系统配有10台高分辨率彩色相机以及2台Kinect二代深度相机，光源包括4盏均匀光照的专业摄影灯以及120个单独可控的LED
灯，可以实现多视角变光照同步采集；第二套系统更加简洁，利用6台闪光灯同步曝光，触发10台单反相机同步采集，得到高质量图片；第三套系统为环形GoPro相机阵列，设
计实现配套的多相机控制采集软件。
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
其次，提出了一种新的标定系统，可以一次性同时标定多台不同尺度、不同视场角的相机，与传统的棋盘格标定、一维球体标定等方法相比，具有采集简单、运算速度快等显著优势，
重投影误差可达3
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
textperthousand
\end_layout

\end_inset

 像素。该标定算法不仅可用于本硬件系统，同样适用各种多相机标定场合，尤其可以解决对不同尺度相机标定的问题。
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
最后，提出了一种人脸三维重建算法，该算法基于不同视角的二维图片进行逐像素匹配，计算优化视差图，从而鲁棒地重建出高精度的人脸三维点云，并通过一系列的后处理最终获得
带有纹理信息的人脸三角面片模型。该算法精度优于photoscan软件、PVMS2开源算法，同样可以用于其他物体的三维重建，有望在文物三维重建等领域发挥作用。
\end_layout

\begin_layout Keywords
相机阵列；多相机标定；三维重建
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract(en)
In the field of computer vision, the goal of most research about human faces,
 including face detection, recognition and alignment, is to identify the
 faces.
 As most existing approaches and databases are limited to 2D images, it
 is difficult to fully reflect the facial features, which causes limitations
 in the application of face recognition.
 3D face models are expected to provide more information to break through.
 However, as existing 3D face databases do not have enough models and facial
 expressions, and some of them lack key parts like ears or chin, it is important
 to construct a more complete 3D face database.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract(en)
This paper aims to build a 3D face capturing and reconstruction system,
 which can provide multiple face images with various expressions and directions
 under multiple light conditions.
 This work has the following three major components:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract(en)
First, we build three multi-camera capture systems.
 The first system includes ten high resolution color cameras and two Kinect2
 depth cameras.
 Light sources include four professional photography lights with uniform
 illumination and 120 individually controllable LED lights.
 The system can achieve multi-direction synchronous capture under different
 lightings.
 The second system is more concise, which uses six synchronized photoflash
 and ten DSLR cameras to get high-quality images.
 The third system is a cylinder GoPro camera array with supporting control
 software.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract(en)
Second, we propose a novel calibration system, which can simultaneously
 calibrate multiple cameras of different scales and FOVs.
 Compared with traditional methods using a chessboard or a wand, this solution
 is simpler and faster, and its reprojection error is below 
3
\lang english

\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
textperthousand 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

pixel.
 This calibration algorithm not only suits this hardware system, but also
 works for other multi-camera systems, especially for cameras of different
 scales.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract(en)
Third, we propose a 3D face reconstruction algorithm.
 This method first calculates the disparity map according to the dense pixel
 matching of images, then reconstructs the high quality 3D face cloud robustly,
 finally produces the textured mesh model after some post-processing.
 The quality of this method is better than those of photoscan and PMVS2.
 This method can also be used for 3D reconstruction of other objects and
 is expected to benefit in other fields like historical relic reconstruction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Keywords(en)
camera array; multi-camera calibration; 3D reconstruction
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
